so there's this phrase that I actually
say quite a lot every day and in my
research and it's that there is a
supermassive black hole in the center of
every galaxy and it's so casual when I
say and it's so throwaway but I kind of
forget it was like a hundred years worth
of research and results from
experimental studies that are
observational and theoretical results
and computer simulations that all jigsaw
puzzle piece together to make this big
picture of the universe that we live in
that allows me to say that so casually
and I used to hate that at school how
you would just talk facts you we never
taught how we actually figured out the
fact and how many different results had
to come together for us to understand
something so I figure it's about time we
change that
so our story starts in 1909 the guy
called faith who was at the Lick
Observatory in San Jose in California
and he was using a telescope there to
look at spiral nebulae
now nebulae back then was just sort of a
word that was used to describe anything
that didn't look like a star so it was
sort of gassy and dusty and just fuzzy
on the thigh really whereas now we know
that what they termed nebulae for
everything we know that nebulae are
things in our own Milky Way that either
the sort of areas where a star has died
or they're areas where stars are being
born
whereas galaxies are actually outside
our own galaxy the Milky Way - that
Islands and cities of stars in their own
right containing like a billion stars
and so what Beth was looking at but he
didn't realize was galaxies and he was
trying to work out whether they look
like other nebulae and when the spiral
shaped nebula were any different and
when he took the light from those
nebulae and split them through a
spectrum and sort of got a trace a graph
of how much light was all the different
colors of wavelengths he found that five
of them looked like they were actually a
collection of stars rather than what had
been seen for nebulae which was emission
lines where it was a fixed one he saw
what looked like a collection of stars
but also with the mission lines now a
mission lines on a spectrum mean that
you've got elements of material that are
giving out light at a very specific
wavelength and that's caused by the fact
that you get light for him and energy
saw shining on like say hydrogen gas and
that then causes the electrons around
that hydrogen gas to jump up to the next
energy level where they could live then
they sort of not supposed to be there so
they drop that down and when they drop
they give out a very specific wavelength
of light and so that had been seen in
normal nebulae because the source of
energy there was other stars that had
died or stars that were being born if
they didn't know is that what he'd seen
in this sixth spiral nebula was actually
emission lines caused by the active
supermassive black hole that was in the
center of that galaxy when I said active
I mean that it was accreting material it
was sort of spiraling in material to
itself and grow
in mass and giving out energy then
ionized the surrounding gases so the
reason that they you know didn't know
that was what he was looking at was
because a we didn't know galaxies
existed back then
the size of the universe was considered
basically the furthest star away in the
Milky Way and B we didn't know that
black holes existed either they were
considered to kind of a hypothetical
object they were first proposed or the
idea was back in sort of 1784 by an
English guy called Mitchell and he
proposed this idea of an object so dense
that the escape velocity that you would
need to get off that object would be
greater than the speed of light but all
through the 19th century physicists
considered light to be a wave and
therefore unaffected by gravity and so
that idea of this object that was that
dense was sort of ignored for a real
long time
that is until Einstein came along go so
Einstein in 1915 released his theory of
general relativity and that got us
thinking about gravity in a completely
different way he said imagine that the
entire universe is made of this fabric
of space-time so the way that the human
brain can pitch that if you imagine sort
of like a bedsheet
stretched all and then you put something
like a basketball in the middle of that
sheet you're gonna then sort of curve
that space right and any object then
traveling on that space is gonna be
affected by the fact that you put a
basketball in the middle say you then
started rolling a marble along it that
marble is gonna spiral in towards that
basketball and he said that's how we can
think about gravity gravity is just
caused by objects bending space-time and
then any object traveling on that
space-time is going to be affected by
the resulting curved nature of it that
meant that light traveling across
space-time would also be affected by the
fact that it is could it's going to be
affected by gravity so couple months
after Einstein published his theory a
guy called Schwarzschild came up with
the equations that you would need to
describe gravity around objects in
Einstein's space-time and then a couple
people noticed something a little bit
weird that there would be this
Schwarzschild radius a point in the
equations where some of the terms went
to infinity if you had a big enough mass
ie gravity itself could become infinite
and they called that sort of point a
singularity and they thought it was
really weird and really strange and
therefore something was wrong but with
the equations and scientists like
Eddington and LaMotta
spent most of the nineteen ten in the
1920s trying to explain away those
singularities in Schwarzschild and
Einstein's picture of general relativity
so in the 20s focus shifted to cosmology
ie understanding how the universe came
to be and what had happened to it since
then and so friedman Walker and LaMotta
all showed that if he took Einstein's
theory of general relativity you could
show that the universe was expanding now
Einstein hated this everyone thought
that the universe was static and so
that's the point where he came up with
his idea of a cosmological constant to
try and add an extra term to his
equations and explain away the fact that
it showed that the universe was
expanding rather than accepting it which
has reassured them because later on in
the decade in 1927 Lamar arrived and
then Hubble in 1929 showed with
observations that the universe was
expanding so Hubble again using
telescopes at the Lick Observatory and
again observing these spiral nebulae he
measured the distances to them and so
first of all that they were so much
further away in the furthest star in the
Milky Way and then second of all that
the grace the distance they were at the
faster they were receding away from us
and so the idea of the Big Bang and
modern cosmology as we know it was born
so this is where nuclear physicists come
in so a guy called trying to say car in
1931 we're studying white dwarfs now
white dwarf is what you get when a star
like the Sun runs out of fuel and dies
and it's sort of the leftover product
it's sort of an inner core of like
carbon nitrogen and oxygen
it's held up by what's called electron
degeneracy pressure so basically you've
taken all the space in an atom you know
the central nucleus of protons and
neutrons and you've taken the electrons
and you squashed all the space out of it
until the only thing that's stopping you
from squashing it more is the fact that
you let
trongs are all negatively charged and so
repel each other
now Chandrasekar said if you look at the
equations for that there is a limit
above which those solutions are no
longer stable and you'll end up
collapsing the star because you can
finally overcome that force between
electrons now Eddington and Landau
argued no that's not physically possible
there must be some unknown mechanism
that would stop the star from fully
collapsing that we just don't know yet
now they were right because a white
dwarf would first of all collapse into a
neutron star what you have in a neutron
star is that you force the electrons and
the protons to actually merge together
to become neutrons so that you all
you're left with is neutrons as densely
packed as they physically can be now
Mickey and beta in 1934 had suggested
that maybe a neutron star could be the
leftover product from a supernova which
is when a star more massive than the Sun
runs out of fuel explodes and dies but
they were considered completely
hypothetical but in 1939 that didn't
stop Tolman volkov and Oppenheimer from
actually looking at the mass that a
neutron star could be stable up until
they found the same thing that
Chandrasekar did up until a certain
limit you actually can't support the
star any longer and beyond that it would
collapse but research sort of stalled
there and that's caused the nuclear
physicists were recruited to work on the
atomic bomb projects of World War two
including Oppenheimer who headed up the
Manhattan Project in the forties
and so focus turned back to that weird
emission scene in the spiral galaxies'
by faith back in 1909 and a guy called
sefa in 1943 published a result where he
said he'd observed six of those galaxies
with the weird emission coming from the
center and he saw that in a couple of
them yes that was narrow emission like
we'd expect but there was also this
emission that had been smeared out or
broadened and now Siebert attributed
that to a Doppler shift ie the gas
that's giving off that light is actually
moving some of it toward you and some of
it away from you and so it stretched to
different colors or different
wavelengths and you see that as sort of
a smearing out now even though those
Doppler shifts were huge which would
mean that the object that the gas was
going around would also be huge in mass
as well it didn't really kick up a lot
of interest now also in the 40s is when
radio astronomy really kicked off as
well so the groups in Australia at CSIRO
and in Cambridge and in Manchester were
all set up towards the end of the 40's
and they started surveying the sky in
radio waves to see what they could find
and so with these maps of the sky and
radio they started to see lots of
pinpricks and very bright patches of
radio in the sky that also were quite
variable in their brightness as well and
so that kicked off a hunt for the
optical or the visible light
counterparts for these objects that were
also going in the radio but by the time
we got to the end of the decade in 1949
Bolton Stanley and Slee had managed to
find three optical counterparts for the
radio sources that we'd seen one was the
crab nebula or Messier one which was
known to be a supernova remnant because
the supernova had actually been seen by
astronomers on earth back in the 11th
century the other with m87
which is the biggest elliptical galaxy
known at the time the brightest radio
source was NGC five one two eight which
we now know as Centaurus a
so throughout the fifties this search
for the opto counterparts of the
ever-growing number of radio sources we
knew about in the sky continued so beta
minkowski in 1954 found that one of the
brightest radio sources Cygnus a was
actually coincident with a pair of
merging galaxies and that kicked off not
just the search for the counterparts but
also a comparison between the shapes or
morphologies and the things seen in the
radio and the things seen in the optical
because the weird thing that people were
seeing was that once you've found the
optical counterpart to the radio source
scene and they were compared the optical
counterpart was in the middle and then
you had two lobes of radio emission
either side as if they've been ejected
out of the plane of the galaxy and so by
the end of the decade in 1959 Burbage
have managed to link a theory that was
proposed by typing hell back in the
1950s that charged particles moving in a
very strong magnetic field on the curved
path could emit radiation it was
something called synchrotron emission
and so Burbidge suggested that was how
the energy was being produced in these
radio lobes either side of the galaxy so
throughout the sixties theorists are
still puzzling over singularities so
whilst they were still puzzling all the
observational results were still flowing
in and I mean a lot of them so bankowski
at the early 60s was still pioneering
this work of finding optical
counterparts to radio sources and so he
was taking spectra again of the light
from the galaxy the emission lines that
he was seeing were no known wavelengths
and so that suggested that I either the
object was incredibly distant like the
most distant thing that had ever been
seen
he actually said a conference that there
is a remote possibility that it was a
galaxy of stars and it's over right but
that it was more likely that it was
something in our own Milky Way with
weird properties that we've never seen
before in o63
Hoyle and Fowler suggested that there
might be such a thing as a hydrogen
burning supermassive star that'd be a
star that would be about 10,000 to about
a billion times the mass of the Sun that
could still be doing nuclear fusion and
burning hydrogen into helium Richard
Feynman then came along and said no that
couldn't possibly
happened because that thing would be so
massive and dense that it would become a
black hole and it would collapse in on
itself right about the same time in 1963
a guy called Schmidt looked at the
spectra of the optical counterparts that
they found for some of their radio
sources and found that even though the
emission lines were very weird
wavelengths
they had a pattern that was very similar
to the hydrogen bomber series that you
could see in nebula Milky Way and then
also in the lab with a hydrogen lamp and
a spectra but if that was the case that
would have put the object at an
incredibly incredibly massive distance
it was actually 10 to 30 times brighter
and optical than it ever ever been seen
in any other galaxy before and so
despite the fact that that was a
convincing argument in terms of the
spectral lines people didn't understand
how anything could be so bright until
Sal Peter in 964 and also Zardo in
1964 both suggested that you could get
that massive optical brightness if you
had matter falling on to a black hole
and being accreted and it could explain
the brightness of these objects that
were being seen by Schmidt and Minkowski
that have been dubbed quasi-stellar
objects then ryanmonk hair in 1967 said
well we could explain the radio emission
if it was ejected at close to the speed
of light
but they didn't know any object that was
energetic enough to actually eject
particle Sherman's higher galaxies with
that speed
now also in the sixties x-ray astronomy
has also kicked off now x-ray astronomy
can't be done from Earth because the
Earth's atmosphere absorbs x-rays so
you've got to launch satellites and
rockets into space in order to be able
to do that so Gaia Kony and Sally 962
one of the first to do this they
launched a rocket from New Mexico in the
USA and they mapped out sort of a
general x-ray background on the sky
along with detecting x-rays from the
center of our own galaxy so that by the
end of the 60s the likes of Bower
Friedman byron Compton Mac they'd all
found x-ray sources in the Crab Nebula
again m87 the giantess elliptical
galaxies known the center of our own
galaxy in the Milky Way
and also the object that Minkowski was
looking at at the beginning of the 60s
they just didn't know what object was
powerful enough to produce x-rays some
of the most energetic radiation there is
so at this point in the 60s ideas were
out there but they weren't really fully
formed yet what it took with the
discovery of pulsars in 1967 by Jocelyn
Bell Burnell and her PhD supervisor
Hewitt they were searching through radio
data and found these regularly pulsing
objects that at the time were thought
even to be aliens little green men they
were dubbed LG m/s what it turned out to
be were rotating neutron stars now the
neutron star is no longer a theoretical
object and if the neutron star is not
theoretical
then maybe it's collapse into a black
hole and a singularity isn't
hypothetical either then in comes
Stephen Hawking along with Roger Penrose
in the late 60s they finally explained
that singularities in Einstein's general
relativity are actually to be expected
they are physical entities and they
shouldn't try to be explained away as
mathematical curiosities and therefore
since neutron stars were also now
accepted as real objects black holes
also came to be accepted at least in the
theoretical community as a real object
so that prompted Lyndon Bell at the end
of the decade in 1969 to build on that
work from 64 by subpoena and by szll
Bobeck to say that accretion onto a
compact object could be the powerhouse
behind optical light sealing quasars the
radio emission the x-ray emission and
that also that modern day galaxies were
the relics of quasars they were dead
quasars where the accretion has stopped
and all that you're left over with is a
supermassive compact object in the
center or a supermassive black hole
so the beginning of the 70s Lyndon Bell
in Reis in 1971 suggested that the Milky
Way could actually hold a black hole at
its center now this is because the Milky
Way was seemed to be very dusty and
giving off a lot of infrared light in
its center and that had also been seen
in the high-redshift quasars that were
beginning to be thought of as black
holes so took until 1974 for Ballack and
brown sugar that was actually radio
emission coming from the center of the
Milky Way and that it was actually
synchrotron emission as well so
combining that with Lynda Mel's
hypothesis at the end of the sixties
then that radio detection was the first
indirect evidence that we had for a
black hole at the center of the Milky
Way and then at the same time Hawking
this time along with Bardeen Carter and
also James Beck in Stein's work had also
showed that you could describe a black
hole in the same kind of way as
thermodynamics that it was radiating
energy where the sort of temperature
that was proportional to the black
hole's surface gravity at the end of the
decade in 1978 a guy called sergeant
started to look more closely at m87 the
most massive elliptical galaxies known
and he looked at the central stars in
m87 and how fast they are moving and
found that given how fast they were
moving they had to be orbiting an object
that was about a billion times the mass
of the Sun so through the 80s focus
turned to these massive central objects
in galaxies like what sergeant and found
at the end of the decade and observers
throughout the decade referred to them
as massive dark objects or MDOT's
whereas theorists were much more likely
to refer to them as black holes
it was sort of more accepted theory that
they existed but hadn't actually been
observational II seen yet and also
because there was a lot of debate still
about whether it was one single object
that was at the center of these galaxies
or whether it was sort of a swarm of
very dense objects like a swarm of black
holes and so throughout the decade
people were trying to get a better
estimate for the masses of these things
so in 1984 dressler measured the massive
dark object in the center of the
Andromeda galaxy and found that it was
10 million times the mass
son and then call Mandi in 1988 is the
same for the sombrero galaxy and found
that it was a billion times the mass the
Sun and so the idea that these massive
dark object might be in the center of
nearly every galaxy started to take seed
so at the start of the 90s first of all
I was wrong but also this idea of
whether the massive dark object in the
center of galaxies was a swarm of black
holes or a single massive black hole
kept people busy and so it wasn't until
the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope
and the use of radio interferometry
actually allowed us to be able to show
it was a single black hole I'm radio
interferometry you use massive radio
telescopes that are separated by
hundreds of miles so that you acts as
one single giant telescopes that you can
see much more detail on the sky and so
Hansa tall in 1994 took a spectra using
the Hubble Space Telescope m87 and
showed that the mass at its center must
be about a billion times the mass of the
Sun but in an area that was about 0.25
arc seconds across in the very center of
it which would be a very small area to
have a cluster or a swarm of black holes
and the nail in the coffin really was
the work by my yoshiya tile in 1995 who
using the V LBA which is when these
radio interferometers found that in
Messier 106 there was a compact object
of about 10 million times the mass of
the Sun within about 1.3 parsecs which
is about 0.42 light-years or 26,000
astronomical units ie 26,000 times the
distance from the earth to the Sun and
so that was just far too much mass in
too small of an area for it to possibly
be a cluster of black holes just because
of the amount of collisions that would
happen in such a tiny space between
those black holes and so the only viable
object these massive compact objects in
the center of these galaxies was a
supermassive black hole the things that
Seifert had seen the radio emission the
x-ray emission it all had to be coming
from supermassive black holes and so
work by hot in 92 and Yuri and Padovani
in 95 actually managed to unify our
picture of these
active galactic nuclei and so what they
said is that all of our the active
galaxies that we've seen were powered by
accreting supermassive black holes it
all just depended on the angle that you
saw out because the way that black hole
was accreting the material was in a very
thin disc around it and so depending on
whether you were seeing that face on
Edie John would depend on whether you
would see the narrow emission the
broader mission that Seifert see the
radio emission the x-ray emission and so
brought together our big picture
understanding of what was powering all
of these different objects so the 2000
saw the advent of the idea that there
are supermassive black holes in the
center of every galaxy and that really
came about because of the amount of
surveys that were launched in a 2000 so
you had optical surveys at the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey yet infrared surveys
like wise x-ray surveys such as Rosa all
of which just boosted our numbers of
active galaxies that we knew about up to
about a hundred thousand throughout the
2000s so because there were so many more
active galaxies to work with it meant
that people could build on work in the
90s that was done by McGorry inand Faber
showing that the mass of the black hole
might be proportional to the brightness
of the galaxy it was in it meant that
the reason Mary in 2000 and Gebhardt in
2000 could show that actually the mass
of the black hole was proportional to
the mass of the Bulge at the center of
the galaxy as well as the black hole
grows the galaxies also grows too and so
it suggested that a black hole might be
a key component and every galaxy not
just active galaxies and so before this
the focus really wasn't understanding
active galaxies separately from other
galaxies whereas now the focus has
shifted to how the two objects Co evolve
together throughout their lifetimes
which coincidentally brings us up to
what I'm working on right now so now the
focus is very much on understanding the
physical mechanism that's actually
growing black holes and galaxies at the
same time now earlier on in this decade
a lot of weight was put towards mergers
of galaxies now mergers of galaxies are
known to build up the amount of stars
that live in the central bulge of a
galaxy kind of like the yolk of a guy
see because of all the distribution of
angular momentum that sinks the Stars to
the center mergers drive the evolution
of both galaxies and black holes however
my recent work has shown that that might
not be in a case so this is work by
Simmons Smethurst and winter from 2017
that showed that galaxies that don't
have that central bulge component still
had supermassive black holes that were
as massive as the kind of things that
were seen in m87 the biggest elliptical
galaxies known and so if the galaxies
didn't have a bulge and they hadn't had
a merger so how's that they grown so
then we had a chat with some friends in
theory who ran some simulations and then
in work by martin Attell in 2018
published that actually only 40% of the
mass that's currently contained in all
of the supermassive black holes in the
universe can be attributed to mergers of
galaxies the other 60% is not from
mergers at all and that the mechanism
that might be powering that coevolution
of growth of black hole and growth of a
galaxy might just be a galaxy internally
driving gas into the center of a
supermassive black hole so I'm just glad
that I get to be this tiny piece of this
jigsaw puzzle of the understanding of
supermassive black holes because
although this might feel like the end of
the story now I can tell you it most
definitely isn't so if a neutron star is
no longer hi Peppa
yeah so through the eighties not to spit
it yeah so now in the 10 Z's the Nazis
tendencies
you